---
bip: "0001"
title: BIP Purpose and Guidelines
status: Active
type: Organizational
author: bhp 
        https://github.com/bhpnet/BIPs/blob/master/BIPS/bip-0001.md
created: 
---

## What is a BIP?

BIP stands for BHP Improvement Proposal. An BIP is a design document providing information to the BHP community, or describing a new feature for BHP or its processes or environment. The BIP should provide a concise technical specification of the feature and a rationale for the feature. The BIP author is responsible for building consensus within the community and documenting dissenting opinions.

## BIP Rationale

We intend BIPs to be the primary mechanisms for proposing new features, for collecting community technical input on an issue, and for documenting the design decisions that have gone into BHP. Because the BIPs are maintained as text files in a versioned repository, their revision history is the historical record of the feature proposal.

For BHP implementers, BIPs are a convenient way to track the progress of their implementation. Ideally each implementation maintainer would list the BIPs that they have implemented. This will give end users a convenient way to know the current status of a given implementation or library.

## BIP Types

There are three main types of BIPs:

1. A Technical BIP (BHP Technical Proposal or BTP) describes any change that affects most or all BHP implementations, such as a change to the network protocol, a change in block or transaction validity rules, proposed application standards/conventions, or any change or addition that affects the interoperability of applications using BHP. Technical BIPs consist of three parts: a design document, an implementation, and, if warranted, an update to the formal specification. Furthermore, technical BIPs can be broken down into the following categories:

- Core - improvements requiring a consensus upgrade, as well as changes that are not necessarily consensus critical but may be relevant to future consensus upgrades.
- Networking - includes improvements to data propagation, or any of the BHP network protocols (see Network Interface in the spec for a full listing).
- Interface - includes improvements around client API/RPC specifications and standards, and also certain language-level standards like method names.
- Informational - describes a BHP design issue, or provides general guidelines or information to the BHP community, but does not propose a new feature. Informational FTPs do not necessarily represent BHP community consensus or a recommendation, so users and implementers are free to ignore Informational FTPs or follow their advice.

2. An Organizational BIP (BHP Organizational Proposal or BOP) describes a process surrounding BHP or proposes a change to (or an event in) a process. Process BIPs are like Standards Track BIPs but apply to areas other than the BHP protocol itself. They may propose an implementation, but not to BHP's codebase; they often require community consensus; unlike Informational BIPs, they are more than recommendations, and users are typically not free to ignore them. Examples include procedures, guidelines, changes to the decision-making process, changes to the BIP process, and changes to the tools or environment used in BHP development.

3. A Recovery BIP (BHP Recovery Proposal or BRP) proposes a state change that is necessary and that cannot be addressed using the standard protocol. BRPs are only valid under a limited, clearly-defined set of criteria (e.g., in the case of protocol bugs destroying network value). The BRP should describe the issue to be corrected, explain why an irregular state change is necessary and justified, and demonstrate that the proposed actions will achieve the BRP's objectives.

It is highly recommended that a single BIP contain a single key proposal or new idea. The more focused the BIP, the more successful it tends to be. A change to one client doesn't require a BIP; a change that affects multiple implementations, or defines a standard for multiple clients to use, does.

A BIP must meet certain minimum criteria. It must be a clear and complete description of the proposed enhancement. The enhancement must represent a net improvement. The proposed implementation, if applicable, must be solid and must not complicate the protocol unduly.

## BIP Work Flow

Parties involved in the process are you, the champion or BIP author, the BIP editors, and the BHP Core Developers.

Before you begin writing a formal BIP, you should vet your idea. Ask the BHP community first if an idea is original to avoid wasting time on something that will be rejected based on prior research. It is thus recommended to open a discussion thread on the BHP forum to do this, but you can also use Slack .

Your role as the champion is to write the BIP using the style and format described below, shepherd the discussions in the appropriate forums, and build community consensus around the idea. Following is the process that a successful BIP will move along:

```
[ WIP ] -> [ DRAFT ] -> [ LAST CALL ] -> [ ACCEPTED ] -> [ FINAL ]
```

## What belongs in a successful BIP?

Each BIP should have the following parts:
- Preamble - RFC 822 style headers containing metadata about the BIP, including the BIP number, a short descriptive title (limited to a maximum of 44 characters), and the author details. 
- Simple Summary - “If you can’t explain it simply, you don’t understand it well enough.” Provide a simplified and layman-accessible explanation of the BIP.
- Abstract - a short (~200 word) description of the technical issue being addressed.
- Motivation (optional) - The motivation is critical for BIPs that want to change the BHP protocol. It should clearly explain why the existing protocol specification is inadequate to address the problem that the BIP solves. BIP submissions without sufficient motivation may be rejected outright.
- Specification - The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature or process. Technical specifications should be detailed enough to allow competing, interoperable implementations for any of the current BHP platforms.
- Rationale - The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing what motivated the design and why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work, e.g. how the feature is supported in other languages. The rationale may also provide evidence of consensus within the community, and should discuss important objections or concerns raised during discussion.
- Backwards Compatibility - All BIPs that introduce backwards incompatibilities must include a section describing these incompatibilities and their severity. The BIP must explain how the author proposes to deal with these incompatibilities. BIP submissions without a sufficient backwards compatibility treatise may be rejected outright.
- Test Cases - Test cases for an implementation are mandatory for BIPs that are affecting consensus changes. Other BIPs can choose to include links to test cases if applicable.
- Security Considerations - All BIPs must contain a section that discusses the security implications/considerations relevant to the proposed change. Include information that might be important for security discussions, surfaces risks and can be used throughout the life cycle of the proposal. E.g. include security-relevant design decisions, concerns, important discussions, implementation-specific guidance and pitfalls, an outline of threats and risks and how they are being addressed. BIP submissions missing the "Security Considerations" section will be rejected. A BIP cannot proceed to status "Final" without a Security Considerations discussion deemed sufficient by the reviewers.
- Implementations - The implementations must be completed before any BIP is given status “Final”, but it need not be completed before the BIP is merged as draft. While there is merit to the approach of reaching consensus on the specification and rationale before writing code, the principle of “rough consensus and running code” is still useful when it comes to resolving many discussions of API details.
- Copyright Waiver - All BIPs must be in the public domain. See the bottom of this BIP for an example copyright waiver.

## BIP Formats and Templates

BIPs should be written in [markdown](https://github.com/adam-p/markdown-here/wiki/Markdown-Cheatsheet) format.

## BIP Header Preamble

Each BIP must begin with an RFC 822 style header preamble, preceded and followed by three hyphens (`---`). The headers must appear in the following order. Headers marked with "*" are optional and are described below. All other headers are required.

` bip:` \<BIP number\> (this is determined by the BIP editor)

` title:` \<BIP title\>

` author:` \<a list of the author's or authors' name(s) and/or username(s), or name(s) and email(s). Details are below.\>

` * discussions-to:` \<a url pointing to the official discussion thread\>

` status:` \<Draft | Last Call | Accepted | Final | Active | Deferred | Rejected | Superseded\>

`* review-period-end:` \<date review period ends\>

` type:` \<Technical (Core, Networking, Interface, FRC) | Organizational | Recovery\>

` * category:` \<Core | Networking | Interface | FRC\>

` created:` \<date created on\>

`spec-sections:` A list of Spec sections that the BIP is updating.

`spec-pr:` The URL for the PR updating the Spec.

` * updated:` \<comma separated list of dates\>

` * requires:` \<BIP number(s)\>

` * replaces:` \<BIP number(s)\>

` * superseded-by:` \<BIP number(s)\>

` * resolution:` \<a url pointing to the resolution of this BIP\>

Headers that permit lists must separate elements with commas.

Headers requiring dates will always do so in the format of ISO 8601 (yyyy-mm-dd).

## BIP Editor Responsibilities

For each new BIP that comes in, an editor does the following:
- Read the BIP to check if it is ready: sound and complete. The ideas must make technical sense, even if they don't seem likely to get to final status.
- The title should accurately describe the content.
- Check the BIP for language (spelling, grammar, sentence structure, etc.), markup (GitHub flavored Markdown), code style
If the BIP isn't ready, the editor will send it back to the author for revision, with specific instructions.
Once the BIP is ready for the repository, the BIP editor will:
- Assign a BIP number (generally the PR number or, if preferred by the author, the Issue # if there was discussion in the Issues section of this repository about this BIP)
- Merge the corresponding pull request
- Check whether the BIP needs to be accompanied by an update to the specification and if so, make sure that a PR to spec repository has been submitted and that the text that updates the spec is reflecting the changes that the BIP proposes.
- Send a message back to the BIP author with the next step.

Many BIPs are written and maintained by developers with write access to the BHP Network codebase. The BIP editors monitor BIP changes, and correct any structure, grammar, spelling, or markup mistakes we see.

The editors don't pass judgment on BIPs. They merely do the administrative & editorial part.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

